Druid 30.0.0 release notes (#16412)
apache/druid: docs/release-info/release-notes.md

- `HOUR` - Same as `'PT1H'`
- `DAY` - Same as `'P1D'`
- `MONTH` - Same as `'P1M'`
- `YEAR` - Same as `'P1Y'`
- `ALL TIME`
- `ALL` - Alias for `ALL TIME`

[#15836](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15836/)

#### Improved filter bundles

Improved filter bundles as follows:

* Renamed the parameter `selectionRowCount` on `makeFilterBundle` to `applyRowCount`, and redefined as an upper bound on rows remaining after short-circuiting (rather than number of rows selected so far).
This definition works better for OR filters, which pass through the
FALSE set rather than the TRUE set to the next subfilter.
* `AndFilter` uses `min(applyRowCount, indexIntersectionSize)` rather than using `selectionRowCount` for the first subfilter and `indexIntersectionSize` for each filter thereafter. This improves accuracy when the incoming `applyRowCount` is smaller than the row count from the first few indexes.
* `OrFilter` uses `min(applyRowCount, totalRowCount - indexUnionSize)` rather than `applyRowCount` for subfilters. This allows an OR filter to pass
information about short-circuiting to its subfilters.

> [#16292](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16292)

Author: Ok, I'll remove the release note for PR 16292.

[#16278](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16278)

#### Double and null values in SQL type ARRAY

You can now pass double and null values in SQL type ARRAY through dynamic parameters.

For example:

```json
"parameters":[
  {
    "type":"ARRAY",
    "value":[d1, d2, null]
  }
]
```

[#16274](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16274)

#### Improved native queries

Native queries can now group on nested columns and arrays.

[#16068](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16068)

#### Other querying improvements

* `typedIn` filter can now run in replace-with-default mode [#16233](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16233)
* Added support for numeric arrays to window functions and subquery materializations [#15917](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15917)
* Added support for single value aggregated Group By queries for scalars [#15700](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15700)
* Added support for column reordering with scan and sort style queries [#15815](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15815)

> * Added support for joins in decoupled mode [#15957](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15957)

Author: Removed the release note for PR 15957

### SQL-based ingestion

#### Sorting on complex columns

The MSQ task engine now supports sorting and grouping on complex columns.
This change also allows the MSQ task engine to roll up on JSON columns.

[#16322](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16322)

#### Manifest files for MSQ task engine exports

Export queries that use the MSQ task engine now also create a manifest file at the destination, which lists the files created by the query.

During a rolling update, older versions of workers don't return a list of exported files, and older Controllers don't create a manifest file.
Therefore, export queries ran during this time might have incomplete manifests.

[#15953](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15953)

#### `SortMerge` join support

Druid now supports `SortMerge` join for `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM` operations.

[#16003](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16003)

#### State of compaction context parameter

Added a new context parameter `storeCompactionState`.
When set to `true`, Druid records the state of compaction for each segment in the `lastCompactionState` segment field.

[#15965](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15965)

#### Selective loading of lookups

> Druid now supports selective loading of lookups in the task layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have built the foundation of selective lookup loading. As part of enabling this, `KillUnusedSegmentsTask` does not load lookups. 
```

This section contains important information about new and existing features.

> ### Improved native queries

Reviewer 2: IMO we should explicitly mention "Support grouping on complex columns and nested arrays"

> Native queries can now group on nested columns and arrays.

Reviewer 2: Grouping on arrays was supported before Druid 30. It should be nested arrays. 
```suggestion
Native queries can now group on supported complex columns and nested arrays.
```

Reviewer 2: Similar functionality is also added in MSQ as well. MSQ can now group on complex columns. However, MSQ doesn't inherently support nested arrays, therefore we can't say MSQ supports grouping on nested arrays.

Author: Updated.

> Native queries can now group on nested columns and arrays.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Native queries can now group on supported complex columns and nested arrays.
```

Reviewer 2: Is it possible to expand upon the feature a bit more - maybe we can add an example and an image.

Reviewer 2: We should mention that rollup on complex columns is supported via MSQ, and the possible advantages of doing so. I think we can combine it in the same section.

The order you write filters in a WHERE clause of a query can improve the performance of your query.
More improvements are coming, but you can try out the existing improvements by reordering a query.
Put indexes that are less intensive to compute such as `IS NULL`, `=`, and comparisons (`>`, `>=,` `<`, and `<=`) near the start of AND filters so that Druid more efficiently processes your queries.
Not ordering your filters in this way won’t degrade performance from previous releases since the fallback behavior is what Druid did previously.

[#15838](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15838)

### Centralized datasource schema (alpha)

You can now configure Druid to manage datasource schema centrally on the Coordinator.
Previously, Brokers needed to query data nodes and tasks for segment schemas.
Centralizing datasource schemas can improve startup time for Brokers and the efficiency of your deployment.

If enabled, the following changes occur:

- Realtime segment schema changes get periodically pushed to the Coordinator
- Tasks publish segment schemas and metadata to the metadata store
- The Coordinator polls the schema and segment metadata to build datasource schemas

> - Brokers fetch datasource schemas from the Coordinator when possible. If not, the Broker builds the schema itself by the existing mechanism of querying Historical services.

Author: Removed lines 110-115.

> This behavior is currently opt-in. To enable this feature, set the following configs:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To enable this feature, set the following configs:
```

- In your common runtime properties, set `druid.centralizedDatasourceSchema.enabled` to true.
- If you are using MiddleManagers, you also need to set `druid.indexer.fork.property.druid.centralizedDatasourceSchema.enabled` to true in your MiddleManager runtime properties.

> You can return to the previous behavior by changing the configs to false.

Reviewer 3: Not needed.

Author: Removed line 122

|`druid.coordinator.kill.segmentSchema.durationToRetain`| [ISO 8601](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601) duration for the time a segment schema is retained for from when it's marked as unused. Only applies if `druid.coordinator.kill.segmentSchema.on` is set to true.| Yes, if `druid.coordinator.kill.segmentSchema.on` is set to true.| `P90D`|

In addition, there are new metrics available to monitor the performance of centralized schema management:

- `metadatacache/schemaPoll/count`
- `metadatacache/schemaPoll/failed`
- `metadatacache/schemaPoll/time`
- `metadacache/init/time`
- `metadatacache/refresh/count`
- `metadatacache/refresh/time`
- `metadatacache/backfill/count`
- `metadatacache/finalizedSegmentMetadata/size`
- `metadatacache/finalizedSegmentMetadata/count`
- `metadatacache/finalizedSchemaPayload/count`
- `metadatacache/temporaryMetadataQueryResults/count`
- `metadatacache/temporaryPublishedMetadataQueryResults/count`

> For more information, see [Metrics](../operations/metrics.md).

Author: Removed lines 124-147.

[#15817](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15817)

Also, note the following changes to the default values of segment schema cleanup:

* The default value for `druid.coordinator.kill.segmentSchema.period` has changes from `PT1H` to `P1D`.

> * The default value for `druid.coordinator.kill.segmentSchema.durationToRetain` has changed from `PR6H` to `P90D`.

Author: Removed.

For example: `(interval, [versions])`. When `versions` is unspecified, all versions of segments in the `interval` are marked as used or unused, preserving the old behavior [#16141](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16141)

#### Nested columns performance improvement

Nested column serialization now releases nested field compression buffers as soon as the nested field serialization is complete, which requires significantly less direct memory during segment serialization when many nested fields are present.

[#16076](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16076)

#### Improved task context reporting

Add a new field `taskContext` in the task reports of non-MSQ tasks.
The payload of this field contains the entire context used by the task during its runtime.

The following is the new report structure for non-MSQ tasks:

```json
{
   "ingestionStatsAndErrors": {
      // existing report content
   },
   "taskContext": {
      "taskId": "xyz",
      "type": "taskContext",
      "payload": {
         "forceTimeChunkLock": true,
         "useLineageBasedSegmentAllocation": true
       }
   }
}
```

> This change is backwards compatible as it only adds a new field at the top-level of the JSON and doesn't modify any existing fields.

Author: Updated.

You can now use the **Query** view to search in tables and columns.

![Use the sidebar to search in tables and columns in Query view](./assets/30.0.0-console-search.png)

[#15990](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15990)

#### Kafka input format

Improved how the web console determines the input format for a Kafka source.
Instead of defaulting to the Kafka input format for a Kafka source, the web console now only picks the Kafka input format if it detects any of the following in the Kafka sample: a key, headers, or more than one topic.

[#16180](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16180)

#### Improved handling of lookups during sampling

Rather than sending a transform expression containing lookups to the sampler, Druid now substitutes the transform expression with a placeholder.
This prevents the expression from blocking the flow.

![Change the transform expression to a placeholder](./assets/30.0.0-sampler-lookups.png)

[#16234](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16234)

#### Other web console improvements

* Added the fields **Avro bytes decoder** and **Proto bytes decoder** for their input formats [#15950](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15950)

> * Added support for exporting results for queries that use the MSQ task engine [#15969](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15969)

Reviewer 4: This PR was already present in 29.1

Author: Removed PR 15969.

* The task status output for a failed task now includes the exception message [#16286](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16286)

### SQL-based ingestion

#### Manifest files for MSQ task engine exports

Export queries that use the MSQ task engine now also create a manifest file at the destination, which lists the files created by the query.

During a rolling update, older versions of workers don't return a list of exported files, and older Controllers don't create a manifest file.
Therefore, export queries ran during this time might have incomplete manifests.

[#15953](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15953)

#### `SortMerge` join support

Druid now supports `SortMerge` join for `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM` operations.

[#16003](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16003)

#### State of compaction context parameter

Added a new context parameter `storeCompactionState`.
When set to `true`, Druid records the state of compaction for each segment in the `lastCompactionState` segment field.

[#15965](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15965)

#### Selective loading of lookups

> Druid now supports selective loading of lookups so that MSQ task engine workers don't load unnecessary lookups.

Reviewer 4: This PR does not make the change for MSQ tasks, only kill tasks. The change to MSQ tasks is in a followup PR, which is not in Druid 30.

cc: @Akshat-Jain Please confirm this

Reviewer 5: @adarshsanjeev Yes that's correct.

#### Nested columns performance improvement

Nested column serialization now releases nested field compression buffers as soon as the nested field serialization is complete, which requires significantly less direct memory during segment serialization when many nested fields are present.

[#16076](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16076)

#### Segment allocation

Druid now associates pending segments with the task groups that created them.

Associating pending segments with the task groups facilitates clean up of unneeded segments as soon as all tasks in the group exit.
Cleaning up pending segments helps delete entries immediately after tasks exit and can alleviate the load on the metadata store during segment allocation.
This can also help with segment allocation failures due to conflicting pending segments that are no longer needed in some cases.

The change ensures that an append action upgrades a segment set which corresponds exactly to the pending segment upgrades made by the concurrent replace action, and eliminates any duplication in query results that may occur.

> [#16144](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16144)

Reviewer 3: This entire section can go inside `concurrent append and replace improvements` as that is the feature which really benefits from this.

Can be rephrased as below:

```
Druid now performs active cleanup of stale pending segments by tracking the set of tasks using such pending segments.
This allows concurrent append and replace to upgrade only a minimal set of pending segments and thus improve performance and eliminate errors.
Additionally, it helps in reducing load on the metadata store.

[#16144](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16144)
```

Author: Updated.

* Improved constant expression evaluation so that it's more thread-safe [#15694](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15694)
* Improved performance for real-time queries using the MSQ task engine. Segments served by the same server are now grouped together, resulting in more efficient query handling [#15399](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15399)
* Improved strict NON NULL return type checks [#16279](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16279)
* Improved array handling for Booleans to account for queries such as `select array[true, false] from datasource` [#16093](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16093)
* Improved how scalars work in arrays [#16311](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16311)
* Improved LIKE filtering performance with multiple wildcards by not using `java.util.regex.Pattern` to match `%` [#16153](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16153)
* Modified the `IndexedTable` to reject building the index on the complex types to prevent joining on complex types [#16349](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16349)
* Restored `enableWindowing` context parameter for window functions [#16229](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16229)

### Cluster management

> #### Use cache for password hashes
> 
> Improved Druid security by using a cache for password hashes while validating LDAP passwords.
> 
> [#15993](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15993)

Reviewer 3: This should go under `Extensions - Basic Security`.

Rephrased as below:

```suggestion
#### Improve performance of LDAP Credentials Validator

Improved performance of LDAP credentials validator by keeping password hashes in an in-memory cache. This helps avoid recomputation of password hashes, thus speeding up the process of LDAP-based Druid authentication.

[#15993](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15993)
```

Author: Moved updated version to Extensions.

#### Improved retrieving active task status

> Improved performance by reducing the number of metadata calls to retrieve the status of active tasks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Improved performance of the Overlord API `/indexer/v1/taskStatus` by serving status of active tasks from memory rather than querying the metadata.
```

Author: Updated.

You can now export MSQ results to a Google Cloud Storage (GCS) path by passing the function `google()` as an argument to the `EXTERN` function.

[#16051](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16051)

### RabbitMQ extension

A new RabbitMQ extension is available as a community contribution.
The RabbitMQ extension (`druid-rabbit-indexing-service`) lets you manage the creation and lifetime of rabbit indexing tasks. These indexing tasks read events from [RabbitMQ](https://www.rabbitmq.com) through [super streams](https://www.rabbitmq.com/docs/streams#super-streams).

As super streams allow exactly once delivery with full support for partitioning, they are compatible with Druid's modern ingestion algorithm, without the downsides of the prior RabbitMQ firehose.

Note that this uses the RabbitMQ streams feature and not a conventional exchange. You need to make sure that your messages are in a super stream before consumption. For more information, see [RabbitMQ documentation](https://www.rabbitmq.com/docs).

[#14137](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/14137)

## Functional area and related changes

This section contains detailed release notes separated by areas.

> ### Web console

Reviewer 6: This was just backported today so not surprising it is not here but https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16318 should get top billing

Author: Added 16318

#### Search in tables and columns

You can now use the **Query** view to search in tables and columns.

![Use the sidebar to search in tables and columns in Query view](./assets/30.0.0-console-search.png)

[#15990](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15990)

> #### Improved array ingestion UX

Reviewer 6: This was already shipped as part of Druid 29.0.1 does it make sense to talk about this here again?

Author: PR 15927 should not have been included in the Druid 30.0.0 release notes. Removed.

* Fixed the Azure icon not rendering in the web console [#16173](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16173)
* Fixed the supervisor offset reset dialog in the web console [#16298](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16298)
* Improved the user experience when the web console is operating in manual capabilities mode [#16191](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16191)
* Improved the web console to detect doubles better [#15998](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15998)
* Improved the query timer as follows:
  * Timer isn't shown if an error happens
  * Timer resets if changing tabs while query is running
  * Error state is lost if tab is switched twice

  [#16235](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16235)
* The web console now suggests the `azureStorage` input type instead of the deprecated `azure` storage type [#15820](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15820)
* The download query detail archive option is now more resilient when the detail archive is incomplete [#16071](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16071)

> * You can now set `maxCompactionTaskSlots` to zero to top compaction tasks [#15877](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15877)

Reviewer 6: Typo? Does it mean `to stop` instead of `to top`?

Author: Good catch - it should say `to stop`. Updated.

This section contains important information about new and existing features.

### Improved native queries

Native queries can now group on nested columns and arrays.

[#16068](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16068)

Before realtime segments are pushed to deep storage, they consist of spill files.
Segment metrics such as `query/segment/time` now report on per spill file for a realtime segment, rather than for the entire segment.
This change eliminates the need to materialize results on the heap, which improves the performance of groupBy queries.

[#15757](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15757)

### Concurrent append and replace improvements

Improved concurrent replace to work with supervisors using concurrent locks.

[#15995](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15995)

You can now grant locks with different types (EXCLUSIVE, SHARED, APPEND, REPLACE) for the same interval within a task group to ensure a transition to a newer set of tasks without failure.
Previously, changing lock types in the Supervisor could lead to segment allocation errors due to lock conflicts for the new tasks when the older tasks are still running.

> [#16369](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16369)

Author: Updated.

#### Nested columns performance improvement

Nested column serialization now releases nested field compression buffers as soon as the nested field serialization is complete, which requires significantly less direct memory during segment serialization when many nested fields are present.

[#16076](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16076)

#### Segment allocation

Druid now associates pending segments with the task groups that created them.

Associating pending segments with the task groups facilitates clean up of unneeded segments as soon as all tasks in the group exit.
Cleaning up pending segments helps delete entries immediately after tasks exit and can alleviate the load on the metadata store during segment allocation.
This can also help with segment allocation failures due to conflicting pending segments that are no longer needed in some cases.

The change ensures that an append action upgrades a segment set which corresponds exactly to the pending segment upgrades made by the concurrent replace action, and eliminates any duplication in query results that may occur.

[#16144](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16144)

#### Improved task context reporting

> Added a new type of task report `TaskContextReport`.

Author: Updated.

> Starting with Druid 30.0.0, all tasks will include `taskContext` in the final JSON that Druid serves over the task report APIs or writes to files.

Author: Removed line 295.

The following is the new report structure for non-MSQ tasks:

```json
{
   "ingestionStatsAndErrors": {
      // existing report content
   },
   "taskContext": {
      "taskId": "xyz",
      "type": "taskContext",
      "payload": {
         "forceTimeChunkLock": true,
         "useLineageBasedSegmentAllocation": true
       }
   }
}
```

This change is backwards compatible as it only adds a new field at the top-level of the JSON and doesn't modify any existing fields.

> If your code or tests consume task reports, don't rely on the JSON to be a singleton map.

Author: Removed line 315.

To opt in, set `lagBased.lagAggregate` in your supervisor spec to `MAX`.
New connections use max lag by default.

[#16284](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16284)
[#16314](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16314)

#### Parallelized incremental segment creation

You can now configure the number of threads used to create and persist incremental segments on the disk using the `numPersistThreads` property.
Use additional threads to parallelize the segment creation to prevent ingestion from stalling or pausing frequently as long as there are sufficient CPU resources available.

[#13982](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13982/files)

#### Kafka steaming supervisor topic improvement

Druid now properly handles previously found partition offsets.
Prior to this change, updating a Kafka streaming supervisor topic from single to multi-topic (pattern), or vice versa, could cause old offsets to be ignored spuriously.

[#16190](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16190)

### Querying

#### Dynamic table append

You can now use the `TABLE(APPEND(...))` function to implicitly create unions based on table schemas.
For example, the two following queries are equivalent:

```sql

> TABLE(APPEND('table1','table2','table3'))

Author: Updated.

[#16223](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16223)

You can now define catalog tables without explicit segment granularities. 
DML queries on such tables need to have the PARTITIONED BY clause specified.
Alternatively, you can update the table to include a defined segment granularity for DML queries to be validated properly.

[#16278](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16278)

#### Double and null values in SQL type ARRAY

You can now pass double and null values in SQL type ARRAY through dynamic parameters.

For example:

```json
"parameters": [
  {
    "type": "ARRAY",
    "value": [d1, d2, null]
  }
]
```

[#16274](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16274)

#### `TypedInFilter` filter

Added a new `TypedInFilter` filter to replace `InDimFilter`&mdash;to improve performance when matching numeric columns.

[#16039](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16039)

`TypedInFilter` can run in replace-with-default mode.

[#16233](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16233)

#### Improved partial index value matching for OR filter

Partial index value matchers for the OR filter now use `PeekableIntIterator` instead of `IntIterator`.

> This change can significantly improve performance when Druid uses the value matchers alongside an index offset.

Reviewer 7: I'm not sure how much end users may understand from this; wouldn't it enough that processing of index backed `OR` expressions was improved?

Author: Updated

[#16300](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16300)

#### Heap dictionaries clear out

> Improved querying to decrease the chance of going OOM with high cardinality data Group By.

Author: Updated.

* Added support for single value aggregated groupBy queries for scalars [#15700](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15700)
* Added support for column reordering with scan and sort style queries [#15815](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15815)
* Added support for joins in decoupled mode [#15957](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15957)
* Added support for using MV_FILTER_ONLY and MV_FILTER_NONE functions with a non-literal argument [#16113](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16113)
* Added the `radiusUnit` element to the `radius` bound [#16029](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16029)
* Fixed the return type for the IPV4_PARSE function. The function now correctly returns null if the string literal can't be represented as an IPv4 address [#15916](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15916)
* Fixed an issue where several aggregators returned UNKNOWN or OTHER as their SQL type inference [#16216](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16216)
* Fixed an issue where triggering a math expression processor on a segment that lacks a specific column results in an `Unable to vectorize expression` exception [#16128](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16128)

> * Fixed NPE while loading lookups from an empty JDBC source [#16307](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16307)

Author: Updated.

* Modified the `IndexedTable` to reject building the index on the complex types to prevent joining on complex types [#16349](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16349)
* Restored `enableWindowing` context parameter for window functions [#16229](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16229)

### Cluster management

#### Use cache for password hashes

Improved Druid security by using a cache for password hashes while validating LDAP passwords.

[#15993](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15993)

#### Improved retrieving active task status

Improved performance by reducing the number of metadata calls to retrieve the status of active tasks.

[#15724](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15724)

#### Other cluster management improvements

* Adjusted salt size for `Pac4jSessionStore` to 128 bits, which is FIPS compliant [#15758](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15758)
* Improved Connection Count server select strategy to account for slow connection requests [#15975](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15975)

### Data management

#### Changes to Coordinator default values

Changed to the default values for the Coordinator service as follows:

> * The default value for `druid.coordinator.kill.period` (if unspecified) has changed from `P1D` to the value of `druid.coordinator.period.indexingPeriod`. Operators can choose to override `druid.coordinator.kill.period` and that takes precedence over the default behavior.

Author: Updated.

> * The default value for the dynamic configuration property `killTaskSlotRatio` has been updated from `1.0` to `0.1`. This ensures that kill tasks take up only one task slot by default instead of consuming all available task slots.

Author: Updated.

This section contains important information about new and existing features.

### Centralized datasource schema (alpha)

> You can now configure Druid to centralize schema management using the Coordinator service. Previously, Brokers needed to query data nodes and tasks for segment schemas. Centralizing datasource schemas can improve startup time for Brokers and the efficiency of your deployment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can now configure Druid to manage datasource schema centrally on the Coordinator. Previously, Brokers needed to query data nodes and tasks for segment schemas. Centralizing datasource schemas can improve startup time for Brokers and the efficiency of your deployment.
```

If enabled, the following changes occur:

- Realtime segment schema changes get periodically pushed to the Coordinator

> - Tasks publish segment schemas and metadata to the metadata database

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Tasks publish segment schemas and metadata to the metadata store
```

> - The Coordinator service polls the schema and segment metadata to build datasource schemas

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The Coordinator polls the schema and segment metadata to build datasource schemas
```

> - Brokers fetch datasource schemas from the Coordinator when possible. If not, the Broker builds the schema.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Brokers fetch datasource schemas from the Coordinator when possible. If not, the Broker builds the schema itself by the existing mechanism of querying Historicals.
```

This behavior is currently opt-in. To enable this feature, set the following configs:

- In your common runtime properties, set `druid.centralizedDatasourceSchema.enabled` to true.

> - If you're using MiddleManagers, you also need to set `druid.indexer.fork.property.druid.centralizedDatasourceSchema.enabled` to true in your MiddleManager runtime properties.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If you are using MiddleManagers, you also need to set `druid.indexer.fork.property.druid.centralizedDatasourceSchema.enabled` to true in your MiddleManager runtime properties.
```

You can configure the following properties to control how the Coordinator service handles unused segment schemas:

|Name|Description|Required|Default|
|-|-|-|-|
|`druid.coordinator.kill.segmentSchema.on`| Boolean value for enabling automatic deletion of unused segment schemas. If set to true, the Coordinator service periodically identifies segment schemas that are not referenced by any used segment and marks them as unused. At a later point, these unused schemas are deleted. | No | True|
|`druid.coordinator.kill.segmentSchema.period`| How often to do automatic deletion of segment schemas in [ISO 8601](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601) duration format. Value must be equal to or greater than `druid.coordinator.period.metadataStoreManagementPeriod`. Only applies if `druid.coordinator.kill.segmentSchema.on` is set to true.| No| `P1D`|
|`druid.coordinator.kill.segmentSchema.durationToRetain`| [ISO 8601](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601) duration for the time a segment schema is retained for from when it's marked as unused. Only applies if `druid.coordinator.kill.segmentSchema.on` is set to true.| Yes, if `druid.coordinator.kill.segmentSchema.on` is set to true.| `P90D`|

> In addition there are new metrics for monitoring after enabling centralized datasource schemas:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition, there are new metrics available to monitor the performance of centralized schema management:
```

[#16041](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16041)

> #### Improved handling of lock types

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Improved handling of lock types for streaming tasks
```

[#15947](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15947)

#### Changes to segment schema cleanup default values

The following are the changes to the default values of segment schema cleanup:

* The default value for `druid.coordinator.kill.segmentSchema.period` has changes from `PT1H` to `P1D`.
* The default value for `druid.coordinator.kill.segmentSchema.durationToRetain` has changed from `PR6H` to `P90D`.

[#16354](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16354)

> 

Reviewer 3: This section is not needed since these configs are being newly added in Druid 30 itself.

Author: I'll add it to the Centralized datasource schema (alpha) section.
